[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> This is magnetite, one of
the most magnetic substances
on Earth.
As you can probably guess, it
has a diverse range of uses,
from fridge magnets to
generating electricity
in power plants.
But what you probably
wouldn't guess
is that your brain actually
synthesizes these crystals,
and you have hundreds
of millions of them
inside your head.
Scientists are still
unsure what role, if any,
these crystals play in
the brain's function.
Studies have inferred
that it may play
a role in long-term memory.
In animals, like honeybees,
homing pigeons, and dolphins,
magnetite is believed to be
associated with the ability
to navigate based on the
Earth's magnetic field.
While similar studies have
yet to be performed on humans,
we do know that
Earth's magnetic fields
affect everything from our
mood to our ability to learn.
Even stranger,
research has begun
to prove links between
the electromagnetic field
of our planet and
psychic abilities.
Do these crystals act like tiny
antennas connecting our brains
to each other and to
the entire planet?
It may sound far fetched,
but, surprisingly, there
is evidence.
Let's look at what we know about
the magnetite in our brains.
To be honest, we
don't know much.
In 1992, the first evidence
of this mineral in the brain
was published.
It was shocking to
uncover that this highly
magnetic substance was actually
synthesized by our bodies.
And while we don't know
exactly what function it
plays in brain activity,
some interesting theories
have emerged.
A 2009 hypothesis
proposed that magnetite
plays a significant role
in long term memory.
It suggests that cellular
components of the brain
communicate with each other
through magnetic signals,
with the magnetite particles
acting as tiny antennas,
simultaneously
receiving information
throughout the different
parts of the brain.
Magnetite also
acts as an antenna
for external
electromagnetic fields,
including the geomagnetic
field of the Earth itself,
and this is where things
start to get interesting.
An enormous body of
research is emerging
that shows substantive links
between magnetic fields
and cognitive function.
Back in 1978, research
physicist Dr. Robert C Beck
published preliminary
research on the effects
of extremely low
frequency magnetic fields
on the moods of human subjects.
ELF fields of 6.67 hertz,
6.26 hertz, and lower
tend to produce symptoms of
confusion, anxiety, depression,
tension, fear, mild
nausea, and headaches.
On the other hand,
fields of 7.8, 8.0,
and 9.00 hertz produce
anxiety-relieving
and stress-reducing effects.
They even mimic some
meditative states.
More recently,
magnetic fields have
been used in successful
clinical practices
for eliminating depression
and bipolar disorder,
with over 1,300 medical research
papers published to date.
The noninvasive treatment known
as repetitive transcranial
magnetic stimulation
uses a wand-shaped gadget
to zap away the
effects of depression.
While all of this is
interesting and can
pave the way for new
therapies and treatments,
a group of researchers at
Canada's Laurentian University
are exploring the role of
electromagnetic forces in more
extreme cognitive functions.
This is Dr. Michael Persinger,
a neuroscientist who
has argued that all phenomena,
including consciousness,
spiritual experiences, and
even paranormal events,
can be explained by
physical mechanisms,
and they can be verified
using the scientific method.
Since 1971, he has
been researching
electromagnetic field effects
upon biological organisms,
and some of his
recent studies sound
straight out of a sci-fi movie.
Dr. Persinger has
shown in the laboratory
that magnetic brain stimulation
can create mental states
conducive to human telepathy.
A recent experiment placed
two people at a distance
in different rooms.
Each was surrounded by an
identical computer-controlled
magnetic field.
When a light was flashed
in one subject's eye,
the person in the other room
showed responses in their brain
as if they saw the
flash of light.
As Dr. Persinger
stated, we think
that's tremendous because
it may be the first macro
demonstration of a
quantum connection,
or so-called quantum
entanglement.
If true, then there's another
way of potential communication
that may have physical
applications, for example,
in space travel.
On a much larger
scale, correlation
has been shown between
the geomagnetic forces
of the planet and a
variety of effects
spanning large populations.
A 2003 study found
strong empirical support
in favor of a geomagnetic
storm effect in stock returns
and evidence of substantially
higher returns around the world
during periods of quiet
geomagnetic activity.
Other research has linked
geomagnetic activity
to suicide, heart disease,
and even birth rates.
A particularly
curious global effect
is related to a standing
electromagnetic wave
that exists between the Earth's
surface and the ionosphere.
Known as the Schumann
Resonance, this wave
has a frequency of 7.8
hertz and is frequently
referenced in alternative
theories of consciousness.
Measurements by
Doctor Persinger have
shown that the fundamental
and harmonics of the Schumann
resonance were discernible in
normal human brain activity,
and, in fact, they correspond to
Dr. Beck's anxiety-reducing ELF
fields.
Stranger still was Persinger's
study of the remote viewer Ingo
Swann.
Remote viewing
refers to a technique
used by psychic spies
working for the CIA.
They were able to
see far off locations
as if they were there, and they
could even move through time.
Ingo Swann was one of the
first and most accurate viewers
in this program.
When Doctor Persinger
measured his brain's
electromagnetic activity
during viewing sessions,
he found a spike in
activity at 7 Hertz
which correlated with the
most accurate viewings.
Could it be that Swann was able
to project his consciousness
by tuning into a standing
geomagnetic wave of the earth?
All of this adds up to
a fascinating connection
between our brains and the
shared magnetic field, not only
of our planet, but potentially
of the entire universe.
It's undeniable that the brain
responds to magnetic forces
on a local and a global scale.
While no one has
been able to prove
the involvement of magnetite,
it seems a likely suspect.
If we learn to harness the
power of these tiny antennas
in our brain, who knows what
kind of psychic superpowers
we might unlock.